Sky Cultures
X
Tukano
Region: America
Use
Tukano is the common name for a group of indigenous tribes who live around the northwestern region of Brazil, near Colombia and Venezuela. The group shown in this work live on the banks of the Rio Tiquié within the Rio Negro bay in the Amazonas State, Brazil.
NASTRAY
TATIA
HIA NA YIARS
MAPO
BUBAGU
AHKORIKO
One circular calendar developed in 200J1112)
Tukano Constellations
Constellations within Tukano astronomical culture are related with natural phenomena as a whole. We gathered twelve constellations with a group who speaks Tukano language. This is not the definitive number of constellations. There are, surely, more constellations to be described. We presented here essentially "the main cycle"2) of the Tukano constellations. Sometimes someone relates new discoveries about these Indians sky concepts or presents new constellation descriptions. Though we are establishing limits and configurations to these constellations that are new to us (non- Indians), they don't organize this body of knowledge in the same way. Their conceptions about sky and Universe are different when compared with ours. They don't organize and conceive ideas about the Universe as a whole, like us.
Hereby we present few data from a research carried out with living people and this data may be variable in near future. We worked with basic school students, elders and story tellers comparing the talks and summarizing it as you'll see below.
In general, we can say that a Tukano constellation, or parts of it, are observed when its setting occurs, like the sunset (heliacal setting) during the short period of an year. There are an amount of natural phenomena related to this astronomical event. For example we can consider Aña's head setting during November and its relation with the increase and decrease of the Tiquié river level. The variation of the river level is accompanied with an emerging of different fishes which appear as the result of these changeable natural conditions. Other larger fishes follow the first group for multiple purposes (eating smaller ones for example). All of them eat some fruits which eventually fall over the river surface.
Ground animals and microorganisms are interested on these fruits, as well as either. So, a phenomenon first described as an astronomical set for us can be seen inside a more complex behavior for Tukanos and their neighbors around this region. Animals, plants and also spiritual manifestations are in a complex relationship under the cosmological view that we can't ignore anymore.
Sources
This work is part of an amount of researches developed as a survey, conducted between 2005 and 2007 that resulted in a doctoral/PhD thesis (Cardoso, 2007). Relying on Ethnomatematics sources
(D'ambrosio, 2002), in practical sky
observation activities and on classical sources about constellations observed in Brazil's Amazon region, we accomplished a sky mapping of these Indian ethnicity: Tukano, Dessano and Tuyuka but in particular, the first one. From the description of many constellations we created an astronomical events and climate calendar along with students from differentiated Yupuri's indigenous school. Rain periods, drought, planting and harvesting are
marked by the sunset and sunrise of the major constellations created by Amazonia northwest
Indians.
^ About
Authors
Walmir Thomazi Cardoso gathered this information in a survey that is part of his PhD. Thesis of Ethnomathematics.
Illustrations were made by Antonio Gumercindo Taques dos Santos (Ticão) and Youssif Ganthous