Sky Cultures

Blackfoot
Region: America

The Blackfoot is an Algonquian-speaking tribe living in the northern Great Plains of North America.
This sky culture has 4 constellation line figures, and names for the Milky Way, the Pleiades, the Orion Nebula, three planets and three stars.
According to the sources, the Blackfoot often featured the Big Dipper, the Pleiades, and the Morning Star on their tipis, and believe that "when people die, their spirits go into the sky and become stars, thus ever increasing the number of stars in the heavens"
Constellations and star names
The constellation Seven Brothers and Their Sister (identified with the Western Big Dipper) represents siblings who escape to the sky when being chased by a bear. The sister is the small star Alcor in one version. This is the version written here: the source doesn't explicitly provide the
constellation lines, but identifies it with the modern Big Dipper, as a bowl with a handle, so Alcor is not connected by a line, but is part of the constellation.
Two stars are named: the Little Sister, also named as Sinopa (translated Kit-Fox)(3)
", and "the
star at the end of the handle is often called Last Brother"!!!
. This constellation was used for time-
keeping before the introduction of clocks.
In a second version of this constellation, the youngest brother becomes the North Star, and the sister (who used to carry him) is the pointer star at the lip of the bowl.
The two main stars in Gemini (Castor and Pollux) are Ashes-Chief and Stuck-Behind, twins whose story explains how a particular tipi design came into use.
The Lodge of the Spider Man is the brightest six stars of the Western Northern Crown, representing the stones laid in a circle which used to hold down a tipi. The Spider Man's Fingers is a possible configuration of stars in Hercules""]
, SO
its structure is uncertain; they would represent five fingers spinning a thread to let the legendary Feather Woman (native name: So-at-sa-ki) down from the sky ("the five bright stars just beyond [the Northern Crown] in the constellation of Hercules are his five fingers" 3).
The six stars of the Pleiades (called Lost Children or Bunched Stars) represent six poor children and have an associated story which explains why they are visible in the evening sky only from fall to spring, but not the rest of the year.
A constellation called Hand in the Sky has been documented, but not identified (so is not in this dataset). It could be another name for the Spider Man's Fingers, or another constellation entirely.
A constellation called Hand in the Sky has been documented, but not identified (so is not in this dataset). It could be another name for the Spider Man's Fingers, or another constellation entirely.
An associated story also explains a particular tipi design.
The North Star is called the Star that Stands Still (the other stars walk around it).
Planets
Jupiter is known as Young Morning Star, representing a boy, Poia. Venus is known as Morning Star, the boy's father. A story explains that they sometimes travel together, but they may also travel apart for many years. At the time when this story was documented (in July 1905), they were in conjunction. The names for Mars are not explained in the source.
Other sky objects
The Milky Way is called the Wolf Trail, which represents the shortest path from the sky to the earth. The Orion Nebula is the stone knife of the mythical person Blood-Clot, "a culture hero who rids the world of evil"!!,
, and is also called Smoking-
Star.